Active learning is distinguished from more traditional college lectures where students passively receive information from the instructor. Active learning must include ‘student activity and engagement in the learning process’ (Prince, 2004, p. 223). Students tangibly participate in activities within the classroom during the class session. This student participation requires higher order thinking where students generate knowledge and understanding. Although not always included, metacognition, where students reflect on what they have learned, is often a key link between activity and learning. Active learning is based on the constructivist learning theory (Bransford et al., 1999). The constructivist learning theory can be traced to Socrates who asked students questions which led students to realize weaknesses in their current thinking. Later Piaget and Dewey expanded this model through progressive education with children (Matthews, 2003; Piaget, 1973). Piaget focused on how learning developed as a result of one logical structure composed over the next. Dewey found value in grounding education in real world experiences: ‘If you have doubts about how learning happens, engage in sustained inquiry: study, ponder, consider alternate possibilities and arrive at your belief grounded in evidence.’ (Reese, 2013, p. 320) Such an approach fostered inquiry as a fundamental approach to learning. Later, Vigotsky addressed the value of the ‘zone of proximal learning’ where students solve problems beyond their actual developmental level when under the guidance of an instructor or peers.The constructivist theory asserts that students construct their knowledge and understanding through experiences and reflection on those experiences. Once a student encounters a new concept, the student reconciles or connects that concept with previous ideas and practical experience. In the classroom, the active learning approach often uses experiments and real-world problem solving to build student knowledge and then reflect and discuss what students are doing and how their understanding is evolving. The teacher serves the role of guiding the students and attempts to build on existing knowledge. When faculty who support active learning are compared with more traditional instructors’ attitudes, the largest gap appears to be in the area of how active learning can be impactful in large classes (Pundak et al., 2009). Wide variations in what can and cannot be envisioned from an active learning perspective occur. Other key issues identified as gaps include student willingness to participate in classes, student willingness to learn by themselves, and student ability to generate new arguments and ideas (Chakraborty, 2016; Pundak et al., 2009). 
